Heterogeneous Networks (a.k.a. HetNets) are essentially
made up of existing disparate Radio Access Network
(RAN) technologies (e.g. WiMAX, Wi-Fi, E-UTRAN,
etc.). They usually consist of multiple architectures,
transmission solutions, and base stations of varying power
capacity. The constituent networks are used for the
purposes of improving user experience, reducing
bottlenecks in RAN and core network (CN). HetNets are
also helpful in introducing intelligent IP traffic routing and
management, as well as efficient load balancing and
resource allocation, by ways not limited to aggregating
disparate network radio resources, as well as in offloading
and loading selected or bulk packet-switched/circuitswitched (ps/cs) traffic between the HetNets. 3G-WLAN
has been investigated beyond other inter-technology
options. This is probably due to the attendant
complementary offerings e.g. for WLAN: high data rates,
short range, low mobility, while for UMTS: relatively low
data rates, long range, high mobility [1]. These disparate
radio interfaces are merged both at the UE and RAN; as a
result, multi-radio frameworks (both client-based and hostbased) enabling mobility and handover managements are
necessary [2]. Moreover, none of the existing second and
third generation technologies or services has been able to
provide the ubiquity required in network coverage with
accompanying Quality of Service (QoS) levels. Hence, it
becomes of imperative importance that UEs make efficient
use of all available network interfaces to maintain an
„Always Best Connected’ scenario to a corresponding
node. Thus requiring multiple Radio Access Technologies
(RATs) to coexist, internetwork and interoperate [3].
Interworking of wireless networks requires mobility
management at the network layer and session management
at the application layer. Protocols such as Mobile Internet
Protocol (MIP), MOBIKE, SIP, etc. are all under
investigation by various standardization bodies and
independent research groups, particularly the IEEE
Standards Association (IEEE SA).
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II in
its subsections describes in details various internetworking
scenarios reported in the literature vis-à-vis the various
wireless networking platforms currently available and
those under development. EPC-based internetworking of
WiMAX and UTRAN is discussed in part A. Interworking
scenarios reported in the literature for WiMAX and 3G
cellular networks are considered in part B. Part C of the
same section considers internetworking of WLAN and
WiMAX Networks, paying particular attention to the
MIH-MPA, Multi-mode, and Mobile SIP approaches.
Scenarios for internetworking CDMA 2000 and WLAN
are discussed in part D. Part E considers the
internetworking of WLAN with 3G networks, while the
algorithm for internetworking WLAN with 3GPP
networks is discussed in part F. The IMS-based